index.md, before:

---
title: About
author: Tikhon Jelvis
---

<div class="content">

<div class="announcement">

Started at Target, designing a Haskell DSL for operations research.

<div> </div>

Two recent talks, both recorded:

  * [Introduction to FRP](talks/frp-2016) at the [East Bay Haskell meetup][eb-haskell]
  * [Analyzing Programs with Z3](talks/compose-2016) at [Compose 2016][compose] in NYC

[compose]: http://www.composeconference.org/2016/
[eb-haskell]: http://www.meetup.com/East-Bay-Haskell-Meetup/

</div>

[shattered-worlds]: http://alexnisnevich.github.io/ld30/

I'm a programmer with a focus on programming languages and functional programming. At the moment, I'm working at Target as a "Lead Data Scientist"[^title] developing a domain-specific language for operations research.

I enjoy presenting about CS and try to give [talks](talks) regularly. I like writing as well but haven't updated my blog in a while—I'm more active on [Quora](https://www.quora.com/Tikhon-Jelvis/answers) and [StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/users/286871/tikhon-jelvis), writing mostly (but not entirely) about CS.

[^title]: I didn't choose my job title! It's not very representative of what I actually do.

    But even if I had a choice, what title would really describe what I'm doing? It's not quite research, but it's not quite not research either. Sometimes it even involves category theory.

![I'm pointing to my screen as I explain something to my partner during a [Lean Poker] event.](img/me_pointing_to_screen.jpg)

[Lean Poker]: http://leanpoker.org/

### Background

I studied CS at Berkeley, with an informal focus on programming languages. I worked on an undergraduate research project on program synthesis with Professor Bodik at the ParLab. The project was [Chlorophyll], a synthesis-aided compiler for low-power architectures and resulted in a paper at [PLDI 2014][pldi].

[Chlorophyll]: http://pl.eecs.berkeley.edu/projects/chlorophyll/
[pldi]: http://conferences.inf.ed.ac.uk/pldi2014/acceptedpapers.html

Apart from research I also interned at a few different companies from a mid-size enterprise software company to several (very) early stage startups. One highlight was a summer at Jane Street Capital, a proprietary trading firm in New York famous for using OCaml. Seeing the raw power of typed functional programming at scale there cemented my preference for ML-style languages, although I still go for Haskell over OCaml.

Over all, I rather enjoyed research and would have been interested in grad school but unfortunately ended up dropping out after junior year (for a mix of reasons). It's all a bit of a mess but I'm still interested in getting back into research and grad school in the future---for now, though, I'm at Target because the project and team were too awesome to pass up.

Outside CS, I'm an avid skier and a saber fencer (albeit on hiatus). I'm casually interested in typography and typefaces---if I was a designer, I'd be doing something minimalist with text. I like literature, particularly anything with an existential bent, and a range of experimental music from progressive metal to minimalist compositions and modern jazz.

## Contact

Email me at [tikhon@jelv.is](mailto:tikhon@jelv.is). I am always happy to respond, especially about Haskell. However, I might take a while. If I don't write back for a couple of days, please feel free to prod me again: I occasionally lose track of emails even if I have a response.

Unless otherwise noted, content on this site is available under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>. If you want to use something beyond this license or have questions about it, feel free to contact me; I'm usually accommodating.

</div>

Commit message:

Cleaned up and simplified text on my main page.
Updated news section.

index.md, after:

---
title: Tikhon Jelvis
author: Tikhon Jelvis
---

<div class="content">

<div class="announcement">

[BayHac 2017][bh] is coming up in April—I'll be giving a talk about stochastic optimization in Haskell at Target.

[bh]: https://wiki.haskell.org/BayHac2017

<div> </div>

I'm giving a talk about GHCJS and Reflex FRP at [a meetup][frb] hosted by First Republic Bank on Thursday, February 2nd.

[frb]: https://www.meetup.com/Bay-Area-Haskell-Users-Group/events/236725835/

</div>

[shattered-worlds]: http://alexnisnevich.github.io/ld30/

I'm a programmer with a background in functional programming and programming languages. I'm applying ideas from these fields to operations research at Target—we're developing a framework for expressing and solving large-scale stochastic optimization problems.

I enjoy writing and giving talks about CS. Check out my [talks] and my writing on my [blog], [Stack Overflow][so] and [Quora].

![I'm pointing to my screen as I explain something to my partner during a [Lean Poker] event.](img/me_pointing_to_screen.jpg)

[Lean Poker]: http://leanpoker.org/

[blog]: blog
[talks]: talks
[so]: http://stackoverflow.com/users/286871/tikhon-jelvis
[Quora]: https://www.quora.com/Tikhon-Jelvis/answers


## Contact

Email me at [tikhon@jelv.is](mailto:tikhon@jelv.is). I am always happy to respond to emails—if you don't hear back in a few days, please ping me again: I am liable to fall behind on emails.

Unless otherwise noted, content on this site is available under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>. If you want to use something beyond this license or have questions about it, feel free to contact me; I'm usually accommodating.

</div>
