projects.md, before:

---
title: Projects
author: Tikhon Jelvis
---

<div class="projects content">

# Projects

## Current

[Semantic Version Control](/cow) 
  ~ ![Detecting a moved and modified block of JavaScript code.](projects/img/cow-thumbnail.png)
  A proof-of-concept diff and merge algorithm that looks at the **structure of code** rather than just text. Currently it's in a background research phase, trying to formalize the approach used in the proof of concept and find relevant algorithms and metrics in the literature.

[Patricia Tries](projects/different-tries)
  ~ ![A binary trie with a three-bit key. Figure from Okasaki's paper.](projects/different-tries/img/trie.png) I'm implementing a couple of variants on Patricia tries to understand exactly how they work and how to optimize them. The end-goal is to efficient implement an adaptive radix tree.

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## Ludum Dare

I've participated in two [Ludum Dare game jams][ld] which involve building a game in 72 hours with a small team.

[Shattered Worlds][shattered-worlds]
  ~ ![Jumping over a bear in Shattered Worlds.](projects/img/shattered-worlds-thumbnail.png) A platformer where you can overlay a map from any level you've passed on top of the current level. The theme was "connected worlds" and Alex wrote a nice [postmorten][shattered-worlds-postmortem] for the project.

[Asteroid Tycoon][asteroid-tycoon]
  ~ ![A spaceship dropping off robots in Asteroid Tycoon](projects/img/asteroid-tycoon-thumbnail.png) A tunneling game where you buy robots to mine asteroids. The robots do their own path finding and mine until they explode and teleport your reward to the ship. The theme was "below the surface" and Alex wrote a [nice postmortem][asteroid-tycoon-postmortem] for the project.


[shattered-worlds]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/ludum-dare-30/?action=preview&uid=3353
[shattered-worlds-postmortem]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/2014/09/11/shattered-worlds-postmortem/

[asteroid-tycoon]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/ludum-dare-29/?action=preview&uid=3353
[asteroid-tycoon-postmortem]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/2014/05/07/asteroid-tycoon-postmortem/

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## Haskell

Haskell is now easily my favorite language. Here are some projects I've used it for. Also check out my [blog](/blog) which tends to focus on Haskell and functional programming.

[TPL](/tpl)
  ~ ![The TPL Logo](projects/img/tpl-thumbnail.png) A simple but flexible dynamically typed scripting language. Has a mostly working implementation, but was abandoned because of design issues. (Designing a language is hard!)

[modular-arithmetic][ma-github]
  ~ ![Modular arithmetic in action.](projects/img/modular-arithmetic-thumbnail.png) A simple library [on Hackage][ma-hackage] for creating integral types modulo some constant, like ``Integer `Mod` 10`` or, with some Unicode and operator goodness, `ℤ/10`.

[ma-hackage]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/modular-arithmetic
[ma-github]: https://github.com/TikhonJelvis/modular-arithmetic

[FRP](/frp)
  ~ ![A simple GUI for the game of life.](projects/img/frp-life-thumbnail.png) My final project for CS 263, a survey of functional reactive programming (FRP) and the rich theory behind it. Includes a [game of life][reactive-life] GUI in 40 lines of code. I keep on meaning to turn it into a tutorial…

[reactive-life]: https://github.com/TikhonJelvis/reactive-life

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## JavaScript

A few projects in JavaScript dating back from freshman year in college.

[Drawing](/draw)
  ~ ![A sample drawing.](projects/img/draw-thumbnail.png) A little toy for drawing pictures from mathematical functions---it can be a lot of fun! It applies a user-supplied JavaScript function to every pixel in a given area to produce neat designs.

[Cards](/cards)
  ~ ![Part of a Klondike game written with our library.](projects/img/cards-thumbnail.png) A simple library for making card games in JavaScript, designed and implemented with a couple of other people during an [18-hour hackathon](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/marissa-louie/for-the-win-at-the-berkel_b_844749.html). We got second place!

[Maze](/maze)
  ~ ![Part of a generated maze.](projects/img/js-mazes-thumbnail.png) Exploring randomly generated mazes with JavaScript and canvas. (Also see my [blog post][maze-post] about graphs and mazes in Haskell.)

[maze-post]: /blog/Generating-Mazes-with-Inductive-Graphs

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## High School

Here are a couple of projects I worked on back in high school. (The rest, unfortunately, are lost to time.) Old, but still neat!

[Chess](/chess)
  ~ ![Part of a chess game.](projects/img/js-chess-thumbnail.png) A JavaScript chess game with an AI developed by [Jessica Taylor][jessica], a friend. The AI only looks three moves ahead, but can still beat me :(.

[Simulation](/simulation)
  ~ ![One view into the simulation.](projects/img/simulation-thumbnail.png) A 2D physics engine supporting polygons and circles, written with [Jessica Taylor][jessica]. Had a basic physics engine built upon Newton's method (which we more or less rediscovered ourselves) and several tools for working with and viewing the simulation.

[jessica]: http://jessic.at

</div>

Commit message:

Added links to some quora posts I wrote about TPL.

projects.md, after:

---
title: Projects
author: Tikhon Jelvis
---

<div class="projects content">

# Projects

## Current

[Semantic Version Control](/cow) 
  ~ ![Detecting a moved and modified block of JavaScript code.](projects/img/cow-thumbnail.png)
  A proof-of-concept diff and merge algorithm that looks at the **structure of code** rather than just text. Currently it's in a background research phase, trying to formalize the approach used in the proof of concept and find relevant algorithms and metrics in the literature.

[Patricia Tries](projects/different-tries)
  ~ ![A binary trie with a three-bit key. Figure from Okasaki's paper.](projects/different-tries/img/trie.png) I'm implementing a couple of variants on Patricia tries to understand exactly how they work and how to optimize them. The end-goal is to efficient implement an adaptive radix tree.

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## Ludum Dare

I've participated in two [Ludum Dare game jams][ld] which involve building a game in 72 hours with a small team.

[Shattered Worlds][shattered-worlds]
  ~ ![Jumping over a bear in Shattered Worlds.](projects/img/shattered-worlds-thumbnail.png) A platformer where you can overlay a map from any level you've passed on top of the current level. The theme was "connected worlds" and Alex wrote a nice [postmorten][shattered-worlds-postmortem] for the project.

[Asteroid Tycoon][asteroid-tycoon]
  ~ ![A spaceship dropping off robots in Asteroid Tycoon](projects/img/asteroid-tycoon-thumbnail.png) A tunneling game where you buy robots to mine asteroids. The robots do their own path finding and mine until they explode and teleport your reward to the ship. The theme was "below the surface" and Alex wrote a [nice postmortem][asteroid-tycoon-postmortem] for the project.


[shattered-worlds]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/ludum-dare-30/?action=preview&uid=3353
[shattered-worlds-postmortem]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/2014/09/11/shattered-worlds-postmortem/

[asteroid-tycoon]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/ludum-dare-29/?action=preview&uid=3353
[asteroid-tycoon-postmortem]: http://ludumdare.com/compo/2014/05/07/asteroid-tycoon-postmortem/

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## Haskell

Haskell is now easily my favorite language. Here are some projects I've used it for. Also check out my [blog](/blog) which tends to focus on Haskell and functional programming.

[TPL](/tpl)
  ~ ![The TPL Logo](projects/img/tpl-thumbnail.png) A simple but flexible dynamically typed scripting language with some design issues. **Designing a language is hard!** This project changed how I think about [programming language design][tpl-pl-design] and [programming in general][tpl-general], which I wrote about on Quora.

[modular-arithmetic][ma-github]
  ~ ![Modular arithmetic in action.](projects/img/modular-arithmetic-thumbnail.png) A simple library [on Hackage][ma-hackage] for creating integral types modulo some constant, like ``Integer `Mod` 10`` or, with some Unicode and operator goodness, `ℤ/10`.

[tpl-pl-design]: https://www.quora.com/If-you-were-to-design-a-programming-language-what-language-would-it-evolve-from-and-what-aspect-of-that-language-would-you-do-differently/answer/Tikhon-Jelvis?share=1
[tpl-general]: https://www.quora.com/What-programming-projects-have-given-you-the-most-insight-on-a-programming-concept-technique/answer/Tikhon-Jelvis?share=1

[ma-hackage]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/modular-arithmetic
[ma-github]: https://github.com/TikhonJelvis/modular-arithmetic

[FRP](/frp)
  ~ ![A simple GUI for the game of life.](projects/img/frp-life-thumbnail.png) My final project for CS 263, a survey of functional reactive programming (FRP) and the rich theory behind it. Includes a [game of life][reactive-life] GUI in 40 lines of code. I keep on meaning to turn it into a tutorial…

[reactive-life]: https://github.com/TikhonJelvis/reactive-life

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## JavaScript

A few projects in JavaScript dating back from freshman year in college.

[Drawing](/draw)
  ~ ![A sample drawing.](projects/img/draw-thumbnail.png) A little toy for drawing pictures from mathematical functions---it can be a lot of fun! It applies a user-supplied JavaScript function to every pixel in a given area to produce neat designs.

[Cards](/cards)
  ~ ![Part of a Klondike game written with our library.](projects/img/cards-thumbnail.png) A simple library for making card games in JavaScript, designed and implemented with a couple of other people during an [18-hour hackathon](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/marissa-louie/for-the-win-at-the-berkel_b_844749.html). We got second place!

[Maze](/maze)
  ~ ![Part of a generated maze.](projects/img/js-mazes-thumbnail.png) Exploring randomly generated mazes with JavaScript and canvas. (Also see my [blog post][maze-post] about graphs and mazes in Haskell.)

[maze-post]: /blog/Generating-Mazes-with-Inductive-Graphs

</div>
<div class="projects content">

## High School

Here are a couple of projects I worked on back in high school. (The rest, unfortunately, are lost to time.) Old, but still neat!

[Chess](/chess)
  ~ ![Part of a chess game.](projects/img/js-chess-thumbnail.png) A JavaScript chess game with an AI developed by [Jessica Taylor][jessica], a friend. The AI only looks three moves ahead, but can still beat me :(.

[Simulation](/simulation)
  ~ ![One view into the simulation.](projects/img/simulation-thumbnail.png) A 2D physics engine supporting polygons and circles, written with [Jessica Taylor][jessica]. Had a basic physics engine built upon Newton's method (which we more or less rediscovered ourselves) and several tools for working with and viewing the simulation.

[jessica]: http://jessic.at

</div>
