talks/index.md, before:

---
title: Talks
author: Tikhon Jelvis
---

<div class="content">

# Talks

Here are the slides for talks I've given at meetups and conferences. Presenting is fun! Unfortunately, most were not recorded. I included links to the ones that were.

![Me giving a talk at the SF Haskell meetup at [Wagon].](img/me-giving-talk-at-wagon.jpg)

My older slides were produced with a customized version of [org-html5presentation.el](https://gist.github.com/kinjo/509761) that does not work properly in Firefox. I've included pdf versions for these---they are ugly but readable. Newer slides, based on [reveal.js](http://lab.hakim.se/reveal-js/#/) (still built from [org mode](https://github.com/yjwen/org-reveal)) should work everywhere (including mobile).

[Wagon]: http://wagonhq.com

</div>
<div class="content">

## Programming Languages/Haskell

[Haskell Love 2020][haskell-love-2020]:

  * [Reasoning under Uncertainty](haskell-love-2020): an introduction to Markov Decision Processes in Haskell.

[Lambda World 2018][lambda-world-2018] in Seattle:

  * [Radix Trees: *How IntMap Works*](lambda-world-2018): an overview of radix trees and adaptive radix trees.

[Compose 2017][compose-2017] in NYC:

  * [Probability Monad](probability-monad) ([video][compose-2017-video]): simple probabilistic programming in Haskell with monads.

[East Bay Haskell][eb-haskell] hosted by LeapYear in Berkeley:

  * [FRP](frp-2016) ([video][frp-2016-video]): a high-level introduction to functional reactive programming (FRP).

[Compose 2016][compose] hosted by JP Morgan in New York:

  * [Analyzing Programs with Z3](compose-2016) ([video][compose-2016-video])- modeling and analyzing programs with the Z3 SMT solver: bounded verification, program synthesis… etc.

[SF Haskell meetup][sf-haskell] hosted by [Wagon]:

  * [Inductive Graphs](inductive-graphs-at-wagon) ([video][wagon-graphs-video]): working with graphs in a functional style using the [functional graph library][fgl] (fgl)

[BayHac 2015](http://bayhac.org): a small annual Haskell conference/hackathon:

  * [Thinking with Laziness](thinking-with-laziness) ([video][bayhac-2015-video]): understanding laziness and using it to write more modular, expressive and elegant programs

[Haskell Hackers meetup][haskell-hackers] (at Hacker Dojo):

  * [Nondeterminism](nondeterminism.html): lightweight nondeterministic programming in Haskell using the list monad
  * [Inductive Graphs](inductive-graphs.html): introduction to functional graph algorithms (my newer talk at Wagon is better)
  * [Analyzing Programs with SMT Solvers](analyzing-programs-with-smt.html): see newer Compose talk

Two lightning talks at [BayHac 2013][bay-hac-2013]:

  * [Program Synthesis for ArrayForth](af-slides.html): brief overview of what I did working on the [Chlorophyll compiler][chlorophyll compiler] at Berkeley
  * [Algebras and Coalgebras](algebras.html): explanation of algebras and co-algebras based on a [post][so-coalgebras] I wrote

A longer talk at [Hac φ 2013][hac-phi-2013]:

  * [Program synthesis](synthesis-slides.html) ([pdf](synthesis-slides.pdf)): a general overview of program synthesis techniques

[haskell-love-2020]: https://haskell.love
[lambda-world-2018]: https://seattle.lambda.world
[compose-2017]: http://composeconference.org/2017/
[compose-2017-video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZ4O-1VYv4c
[compose]: http://www.composeconference.com/2016
[fgl]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/fgl
[chlorophyll compiler]: http://pl.eecs.berkeley.edu/projects/chlorophyll/
[eb-haskell]: http://www.meetup.com/East-Bay-Haskell-Meetup/
[sf-haskell]: http://www.meetup.com/Bay-Area-Haskell-Users-Group/
[bay-hac-2013]: http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/BayHac2013
[hac-phi-2013]: http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Hac_%CF%86
[so-coalgebras]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/16015020/what-does-coalgebra-mean-in-the-context-of-programming/16022059#16022059

[frp-2016-video]: https://begriffs.com/posts/2016-07-27-tikhon-on-frp.html
[compose-2016-video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruNFcH-KibY
[wagon-graphs-video]: http://begriffs.com/posts/2015-09-04-pure-functional-graphs.html
[bayhac-2015-video]: http://begriffs.com/posts/2015-06-17-thinking-with-laziness.html

## Type Theory

I gave a series of talks introducing type theory at the [SF Types, Theorems and Programming Languages](http://www.meetup.com/SF-Types-Theorems-and-Programming-Languages/) meetup at [Mixrank](http://mixrank.com) HQ, going from the untyped λ-calculus to dependent types.

  * [Untyped Lambda Calculus](untyped-lambda-calculus.html) ([pdf](untyped-lambda-calculus.pdf))
  * [Simply Typed Lambda Calculus](stlc.html) ([pdf](stlc.pdf))
  * [Fun with Curry-Howard](curry-howard.html) ([pdf](curry-howard.pdf))
  * [Polymorphism---System F](system-f.html) ([pdf](system-f.pdf))
  * [Dependent Types](dependent-types.html) ([pdf](dependent-types.pdf))

I'm not sure I would recommend following *these slides*, but this general progression is a great way to learn the underlying theory. Implementing interpreters for each stage, working up from the untyped lambda calculus to dependent types, is a great way to learn---it's less of a climb than it seems!

## FRP

I did a survey of functional reactive programming (FRP) for CS 263 at Berkeley. At the end of the semester, I gave a presentation on the subject:

  * [Introduction to FRP](../frp): includes a bit more detail about my example code

</div>

[haskell-hackers]: http://www.meetup.com/haskellhackersathackerdojo/

Commit message:

Added latest SBTB talk + updated Haskell Love link

talks/index.md, after:

---
title: Talks
author: Tikhon Jelvis
---

<div class="content">

# Talks

Here are the slides for talks I've given at meetups and conferences. Presenting is fun! Unfortunately, most were not recorded. I included links to the ones that were.

![Me giving a talk at the SF Haskell meetup at [Wagon].](img/me-giving-talk-at-wagon.jpg)

My older slides were produced with a customized version of [org-html5presentation.el](https://gist.github.com/kinjo/509761) that does not work properly in Firefox. I've included pdf versions for these---they are ugly but readable. Newer slides, based on [reveal.js](http://lab.hakim.se/reveal-js/#/) (still built from [org mode](https://github.com/yjwen/org-reveal)) should work everywhere (including mobile).

[Wagon]: http://wagonhq.com

</div>
<div class="content">

## Programming Languages/Haskell

[Scale by the Bay 2023][sbtb-2023]:

  * [Better Code Design with Types and Concepts](types-and-concepts-2023): how type systems can be a tool for conceptual design, not just correctness.

[Haskell Love 2020][haskell-love-2020]:

  * [Reasoning under Uncertainty](haskell-love-2020): an introduction to Markov Decision Processes in Haskell.

[Lambda World 2018][lambda-world-2018] in Seattle:

  * [Radix Trees: *How IntMap Works*](lambda-world-2018): an overview of radix trees and adaptive radix trees.

[Compose 2017][compose-2017] in NYC:

  * [Probability Monad](probability-monad) ([video][compose-2017-video]): simple probabilistic programming in Haskell with monads.

[East Bay Haskell][eb-haskell] hosted by LeapYear in Berkeley:

  * [FRP](frp-2016) ([video][frp-2016-video]): a high-level introduction to functional reactive programming (FRP).

[Compose 2016][compose] hosted by JP Morgan in New York:

  * [Analyzing Programs with Z3](compose-2016) ([video][compose-2016-video])- modeling and analyzing programs with the Z3 SMT solver: bounded verification, program synthesis… etc.

[SF Haskell meetup][sf-haskell] hosted by [Wagon]:

  * [Inductive Graphs](inductive-graphs-at-wagon) ([video][wagon-graphs-video]): working with graphs in a functional style using the [functional graph library][fgl] (fgl)

[BayHac 2015](http://bayhac.org): a small annual Haskell conference/hackathon:

  * [Thinking with Laziness](thinking-with-laziness) ([video][bayhac-2015-video]): understanding laziness and using it to write more modular, expressive and elegant programs

[Haskell Hackers meetup][haskell-hackers] (at Hacker Dojo):

  * [Nondeterminism](nondeterminism.html): lightweight nondeterministic programming in Haskell using the list monad
  * [Inductive Graphs](inductive-graphs.html): introduction to functional graph algorithms (my newer talk at Wagon is better)
  * [Analyzing Programs with SMT Solvers](analyzing-programs-with-smt.html): see newer Compose talk

Two lightning talks at [BayHac 2013][bay-hac-2013]:

  * [Program Synthesis for ArrayForth](af-slides.html): brief overview of what I did working on the [Chlorophyll compiler][chlorophyll compiler] at Berkeley
  * [Algebras and Coalgebras](algebras.html): explanation of algebras and co-algebras based on a [post][so-coalgebras] I wrote

A longer talk at [Hac φ 2013][hac-phi-2013]:

  * [Program synthesis](synthesis-slides.html) ([pdf](synthesis-slides.pdf)): a general overview of program synthesis techniques

[sbtb-2023]: https://scale.bythebay.io/
[haskell-love-2020]: https://twitter.com/_haskellove
[lambda-world-2018]: https://seattle.lambda.world
[compose-2017]: http://composeconference.org/2017/
[compose-2017-video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZ4O-1VYv4c
[compose]: http://www.composeconference.com/2016
[fgl]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/fgl
[chlorophyll compiler]: http://pl.eecs.berkeley.edu/projects/chlorophyll/
[eb-haskell]: http://www.meetup.com/East-Bay-Haskell-Meetup/
[sf-haskell]: http://www.meetup.com/Bay-Area-Haskell-Users-Group/
[bay-hac-2013]: http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/BayHac2013
[hac-phi-2013]: http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Hac_%CF%86
[so-coalgebras]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/16015020/what-does-coalgebra-mean-in-the-context-of-programming/16022059#16022059

[frp-2016-video]: https://begriffs.com/posts/2016-07-27-tikhon-on-frp.html
[compose-2016-video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruNFcH-KibY
[wagon-graphs-video]: http://begriffs.com/posts/2015-09-04-pure-functional-graphs.html
[bayhac-2015-video]: http://begriffs.com/posts/2015-06-17-thinking-with-laziness.html

## Type Theory

I gave a series of talks introducing type theory at the [SF Types, Theorems and Programming Languages](http://www.meetup.com/SF-Types-Theorems-and-Programming-Languages/) meetup at [Mixrank](http://mixrank.com) HQ, going from the untyped λ-calculus to dependent types.

  * [Untyped Lambda Calculus](untyped-lambda-calculus.html) ([pdf](untyped-lambda-calculus.pdf))
  * [Simply Typed Lambda Calculus](stlc.html) ([pdf](stlc.pdf))
  * [Fun with Curry-Howard](curry-howard.html) ([pdf](curry-howard.pdf))
  * [Polymorphism---System F](system-f.html) ([pdf](system-f.pdf))
  * [Dependent Types](dependent-types.html) ([pdf](dependent-types.pdf))

I'm not sure I would recommend following *these slides*, but this general progression is a great way to learn the underlying theory. Implementing interpreters for each stage, working up from the untyped lambda calculus to dependent types, is a great way to learn---it's less of a climb than it seems!

## FRP

I did a survey of functional reactive programming (FRP) for CS 263 at Berkeley. At the end of the semester, I gave a presentation on the subject:

  * [Introduction to FRP](../frp): includes a bit more detail about my example code

</div>

[haskell-hackers]: http://www.meetup.com/haskellhackersathackerdojo/
